Python Read Text File
If this site saves you hours of work, please whitelist it in your ad blocker 😭 to support us 💖
in creating more helpful and free content in the future.
Summary: in this tutorial, you learn various ways to read text files in Python.

TL;DR
The following shows how to read all texts from the readme.txt file into a string:

with open('readme.txt') as f:
    lines = f.readlines()
Code language: JavaScript (javascript)
Steps for reading a text file in Python
To read a text file in Python, you follow these steps:

First, open a text file for reading by using the open() function.
Second, read text from the text file using the file read(), readline(), or readlines() method of the file object.
Third, close the file using the file close() method.
1) open() function
The open() function has many parameters but you’ll be focusing on the first two.

open(path_to_file, mode)
The path_to_file parameter specifies the path to the text file.

If the file is in the same folder as the program, you just need to specify the name of the file. Otherwise, you need to specify the path to the file.

To specify the path to the file, you use the forward-slash ('/') even if you’re working in Windows.

For example, if the file is readme.txt stored in the sample folder as the program, you need to specify the path to the file as c:/sample/readme.txt

The mode is an optional parameter. It’s a string that specifies the mode in which you want to open the file.

The following table shows available modes for opening a text file:

Mode	Description
'r'	Open for text file for reading text
'w'	Open a text file for writing text
'a'	Open a text file for appending text
For example, to open a file whose name is the-zen-of-python.txt stored in the same folder as the program, you use the following code:

 f = open('the-zen-of-python.txt','r')
Code language: JavaScript (javascript)
The open() function returns a file object which you will use to read text from a text file.

2) Reading text methods
The file object provides you with three methods for reading text from a text file:

read() – read all text from a file into a string. This method is useful if you have a small file and you want to manipulate the whole text of that file.
readline() – read the text file line by line and return all the lines as strings.
readlines() – read all the lines of the text file and return them as a list of strings.
3) close() method
The file that you open will remain open until you close it using the close() method.

It’s important to close the file that is no longer in use. If you don’t close the file, the program may crash or the file would be corrupted.

The following shows how to call the close() method to close the file:

f.close()